[MM-35593] Self-hosted documentation improvements (#826)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/integrate/apps/deployment/_index.md

heading: "Deploying Apps"
description: "TODO"
weight: 110
_build:
 list: false

>  render: false

Author: This change will show the link to this file in the documentation.  It was added to hide this page until the docs were complete.  

This is reverting the portion of [this PR](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/829/files) that hid this doc.

        }
    ]
}
```

> ### Deploying third-party apps to third-party AWS cloud environment

Reviewer: What is a " third-party AWS cloud environment"?

Author: I'm reverting this..  Obviously, it's causing confusion and I don't fully recall the intention.

Note that third-party apps are not supported in the Mattermost Cloud - they're used only for developer testing convenience. Provisioning in the third-party AWS cloud environment is done by the **appsctl** tool after completing the environment set up.

We need an app bundle to provision an app. The bundle might be provisioned from the local disk, from S3 (not implemented yet), or from a URL (not implemented yet). Provisioning consists of three parts which will be completed via the **appsctl** tool:

1. Creating the lambda functions with appropriate policies.
2. Storing static assets in the dedicated S3 bucket.
3. Storing the app’s manifest file in the same dedicated S3 bucket.

#### Mattermost set up

> Follow the Prerequisites section of the [JS](../quick-start-js) or [GO](../quick-start-go) Quick Start Guides to set up your Mattermost instance.

Reviewer: One must also install the apps plugin: https://developers.mattermost.com/integrate/apps/quick-start-js/#install-the-apps-plugin

Author: Added by Justine in [`cc17586` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/cc17586fb1b4135c8cd630ea339cd3e195892763)

> Follow the Prerequisites section of the [JS](../quick-start-js) or [GO](../quick-start-go) Quick Start Guides to set up your Mattermost instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the Prerequisites section of the [JS](../quick-start-js) or [GO](../quick-start-go) Quick Start Guides to set up your Mattermost instance. Ensure that you install the [apps plugin](https://developers.mattermost.com/integrate/apps/quick-start-js/#install-the-apps-plugin) as part of this process.
```

        }
    ]
}
```

> ### Setting up your Mattermost instance and AWS for deploying custom apps

Reviewer: It's not only about customs apps. On-prem customers can also use this method to deploy Mattermost written ones like Zendesk.

Author: @hanzei, that is true.  I think the overall feel of the docs should be that an App is understood at this point and we can remove the `custom` and 3rd party references.  An app is just an "App" that is already defined.

Author: I removed references to `custom apps` and replaced with just `apps`.

[`32e4489` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/32e4489e837bfeb88d2e0e599aebc22a438813ee)

> ### Setting up your Mattermost instance and AWS for deploying custom apps

Reviewer: The previous two sections `App Bundle` and `Making your app runnable as an AWS Lambda function` are targeting devs while this section targets admins. Can we make that more clear? Maybe even split into multiple pages? Like one page for AWS and one (small) for HTTP.

Author: @hanzei, Please see [`86a9c95` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/86a9c953c776a9ded084e54a1eeeec23a623225f)

I created the following L2 Headers 
* Preparing your app for AWS (For App Developers)
* Deployment to AWS (For Admins) 

You have a valid point about separation of instruction into pages, which would benefit the organization of this doc.  

I would propose. 
* Deployment
  * AWS 
    * Preparing your app for AWS (For App Developers) 
    * Deployment to AWS (For Admins) 
    * Optional: Provision the hello-lambda app
    * Provisioned app details 
    * Provisioning in Mattermost Cloud 
  * HTTP Server
* Submit to Marketplace (this should not be in the deploying apps section, but it's own top-level Apps section (under Apps Dev Preview)

Author: What do you think?  I can make these changes easily.  I am out next week, but can get these in if you and @DHaussermann think it beneficial.  I think that would help separate and better define the main portions of the deploy process.

> Note that custom apps are not supported in the Mattermost Cloud - they're only used for developer testing convenience. Provisioning in the AWS cloud environment is done by the **appsctl** tool after completing the environment set up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that custom apps are not supported in the Mattermost Cloud - they're only used for developer testing convenience

Provisioning in the AWS cloud environment is done by the **appsctl** tool after completing the environment set up.
```

Author: done [`32e4489` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/32e4489e837bfeb88d2e0e599aebc22a438813ee)

> Note that custom apps are not supported in the Mattermost Cloud - they're only used for developer testing convenience. Provisioning in the AWS cloud environment is done by the **appsctl** tool after completing the environment set up.

Reviewer: What does `environment set up` refer to? Can we link something?

Author: ```suggestion
Note that custom apps are not supported in the Mattermost Cloud - they're only used for developer testing convenience. Provisioning in the AWS cloud environment will be done by the **appsctl** tool in the AWS setup documentation section
```

Author: I changed the wording a bit to preface that the tool *will be* used in a later section.

Author: Also removes the `environment set up` language.  It was referring to the compilation of the AWS setup and setting the ENV Vars.

Author: See [`32e4489` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/32e4489e837bfeb88d2e0e599aebc22a438813ee)

> We need an app bundle to provision an app. The bundle might be provisioned from the local disk, from S3 (not implemented yet), or from a URL (not implemented yet). Provisioning consists of three parts which will be completed via the **appsctl** tool:

Reviewer: 1/5 that features without a ticket that are not implemented should not be documented.

Author: Dylan and I talked through this also.  The wording remained from an early version of the doc, when we didn't have all the install methods in place. 

Since this doc is about deploying and provisioning via AWS, I removed the other portions for "local disk" and via "URL".  Those are install methods, but should be, if they aren't, described separately.

See. [`93fac70` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/93fac702af145c812e15e829a79194d818b07a2b)

1. Creating the lambda functions with appropriate policies.
2. Storing static assets in the dedicated S3 bucket.
3. Storing the app’s manifest file in the same dedicated S3 bucket.

#### Mattermost setup

> Follow the Prerequisites section of the [JS](../quick-start-js) or [GO](../quick-start-go) Quick Start Guides to set up your Mattermost instance. Ensure that you install the [apps plugin](https://developers.mattermost.com/integrate/apps/quick-start-js/#install-the-apps-plugin) as part of this process.

Reviewer: Please use Hugos way of generating links, see e.g.  https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/blob/cd6675c57d198aee89fb6cc25451c5648438986f/site/content/integrate/apps/_index.md#L38

Author: done. See [`e13236b` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/e13236b628d1bbe68e0fc1c499fed179e6f42141)

#### AWS setup

##### 1. Create AWS S3 bucket

You will need to create an S3 bucket within AWS or use an existing bucket.

1. Visit https://s3.console.aws.amazon.com
1. Create a bucket.

> 1. **Bucket name**: Give your bucket a name.

Reviewer: Should we provide suggestions?

Author: * **Pros** 
  * consitent naming convention

* **Cons**
  * naming does not matter
  * a user can use an existing bucket
  * some might assume the name itself has significance based on the example

Dylan and I discussed this for a decent while and voted against :)

Reviewer: Makes sense :+1:

1. **AWS Region**:
    1. Select your region
    1. Save the slug value for later (Example: `us-east-1`)
    1. Corresponding Lambdas will be provisioned in the same region
1. **Block Public Access settings for this bucket**
    1. Uncheck **Block *all* public access**
    1. Check **Block public access to buckets and objects granted through new public bucket or access point policies**
    1. Check **Block public and cross-account access to buckets and objects through any public bucket or access point policies**

>     1. Check **I acknowledge that the current settings might result in this bucket and the objects within becoming public.**

Reviewer: That should not be needed. We only fetch assets via the API.

Author: This was the convention provided by @levb based on issues encountered when Dylan tested.

Reviewer: That might have been true in the initial version of @levb's PR, but since https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-apps/pull/194 it should not be needed. @DHaussermann Can you confirm?

1. Select **Create Bucket**.

##### 2. Create an IAM user access key and secret

You will need an access key and secret so that `appsctl` can provision the app. These credentials can come from creating an IAM user, using a privileged IAM user, or even using the AWS account owners personal access key. Please follow the instructions [provided by AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/create-access-key/) to complete these steps and save the `Access key ID` and `Secret access key` values.

##### 3. Set AWS Provision environment variables

Open a terminal where you installed the Apps plugin and set the following variables to the AWS credentials just created and saved:

- `MM_APPS_PROVISION_AWS_ACCESS_KEY`  
- `MM_APPS_PROVISION_AWS_SECRET_KEY`

Set the following environment variables based on bucket name and region

- `MM_APPS_S3_BUCKET`  
- `MM_APPS_AWS_REGION`

##### 4. Initialize the AWS resources

The following command will create a Mattermost invoke user and security policy for use with AWS.

> `go run ./cmd/appsctl aws init --create --create-access-key`

Reviewer: What was the reason to move away from the `go install` way?

Author: @DHaussermann and I ran into an issue where he had installed appsctl before, but it was an older version of the code.  We could still use the installed version, but need to ensure it is updated.

Reviewer: The nice thing about `go install` is that it (by default) install the latest tagged version not `master` making it more stable.

The output of the command will contain two "Invoke" environment variables.

##### 5. Set AWS Invoke environment variables

The second set of credentials created from the above initialization step will be used by Mattermost to invoke Apps.  Set these variables in the location of your running Mattermost server repo.

- `MM_APPS_AWS_ACCESS_KEY`
- `MM_APPS_AWS_SECRET_KEY`

#### Restart the Mattermost Server

Ensure you have the following environment variables set.

- `MM_APPS_AWS_ACCESS_KEY`
- `MM_APPS_AWS_SECRET_KEY`
- `MM_APPS_S3_BUCKET`
- `MM_APPS_AWS_REGION`

Restart the Mattermost server to complete your Mattermost and AWS setup. You can now deploy an app to AWS.

#### Test your AWS configuration and permissions

Run the following commands to test and validate your AWS configuration and permissions.

```bash
go run ./cmd/appsctl aws test lambda
go run ./cmd/appsctl aws test s3
```

#### Optional: Provision the hello-lambda app

A test command is also available if you would like to test provisioning the hello-lambda test app. This will add a manifest to the S3 bucket and add a corresponding lambda function to AWS.

> Build hello-lambda bundle

Reviewer: New section?

Author: Dylan and I discussed this too. I have this under the `Optional: Provision the hello-lambda app` subsection.  It is not necessary to provision this hello-lamda app, but it should be documented.  

I took your suggestion and completely pull the section out of `Setting up your Mattermost instance and AWS for deploying apps` section and added to its own section after `Deploying an app to AWS`

Author: see [`f674576` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/f674576da3f507a3167c8e12b1009bb7d952489f)

- `cd ./examples/go/hello-lambda && make dist; cd -`
- `go run ./cmd/appsctl aws test provision ./examples/go/hello-lambda/dist/bundle.zip`

### Deploying a custom app to AWS

After setting up your Mattermost instance, AWS key, and S3 bucket you can now provision your app using `appsctl`. Note that `appsctl` commands are run in the `mattermost-plugin-apps` repo.

Install appsctl  

- `go install github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-apps/cmd/appsctl@latest`

Provision your app  

- `appsctl provision app /PATH/TO/YOUR/APP/BUNDLE.zip`

> The provision command output will show the `/apps` installation to use in Mattermost.

Reviewer: Should we still document the command here?

Author: Added a sub heading call `Install you app` that covers this.

### Provisioned app details

> AWS Lambda functions have semantic names, which means that a function described in the `manifest.json` file translates to AWS as `$appID_$appVersion_$functionName` to avoid collisions with other apps' or other versions' functions. And **appsctl** provisions lambda functions using this name. For example the name of a `servicenow` app's lambda function might be `com-mattermost-servicenow_0-1-0_go-function`. You don't need to worry about the AWS Lambda function names, as the Apps Plugin takes care of it. The dedicated S3 bucket name is stored in the environment variable: `MM_APPS_S3_BUCKET`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWS Lambda functions have semantic names, which means that a function described in the `manifest.json` file translates to AWS as `$appID_$appVersion_$functionName` to avoid collisions with other apps' or other versions' functions. And **appsctl** provisions lambda functions using this name. For example the name of a `servicenow` app's lambda function might be `com-mattermost-servicenow_0-1-0_go-function`. You don't need to worry about the AWS Lambda function names, as **appsctl** care of it. The dedicated S3 bucket name is stored in the environment variable: `MM_APPS_S3_BUCKET`.
```

        }
    ]
}
```

### Setting up your Mattermost instance and AWS for deploying apps

Note that apps are not supported in the Mattermost Cloud - they're only used for developer testing convenience. 

Provisioning in the AWS cloud environment will be done by the **appsctl** tool described in the following AWS Setup section.

We need an app bundle to provision an app. The bundle might be provisioned from the local disk, from S3 (not implemented yet), or from a URL (not implemented yet). Provisioning consists of three parts which will be completed via the **appsctl** tool:

1. Creating the lambda functions with appropriate policies.
2. Storing static assets in the dedicated S3 bucket.
3. Storing the app’s manifest file in the same dedicated S3 bucket.

#### Mattermost setup

> Follow the Prerequisites section of the [JavaScript]({{< ref "quick-start-js" >}}) or [Go]({{< ref "quick-start-go" >}}) Quick Start Guides to set up your Mattermost instance. Ensure that you install the [apps plugin](https://developers.mattermost.com/integrate/apps/quick-start-js/#install-the-apps-plugin) as part of this process.

Reviewer: Please also migrate this URL to use the hugo ref syntax.

Author: done!  I check that the rest of the file uses hugo references for any references to developers.mattermost.com in this file.

Author: [`047951a` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/047951a0b1d3640b90ed7f7a23c15b4257c7472a)

        }
    ]
}
```

### Setting up your Mattermost instance and AWS for deploying third-party apps

Note that third-party apps are not supported in the Mattermost Cloud - they're used only for developer testing convenience. Provisioning in the third-party AWS cloud environment is done by the **appsctl** tool after completing the environment set up.

We need an app bundle to provision an app. The bundle might be provisioned from the local disk, from S3 (not implemented yet), or from a URL (not implemented yet). Provisioning consists of three parts which will be completed via the **appsctl** tool:

1. Creating the lambda functions with appropriate policies.
2. Storing static assets in the dedicated S3 bucket.
3. Storing the app’s manifest file in the same dedicated S3 bucket.

#### Mattermost setup

Follow the Prerequisites section of the [JS](../quick-start-js) or [GO](../quick-start-go) Quick Start Guides to set up your Mattermost instance. Ensure that you install the [apps plugin](https://developers.mattermost.com/integrate/apps/quick-start-js/#install-the-apps-plugin) as part of this process.

#### AWS setup

> ##### 1. Create an IAM user and access key and secret

Reviewer 3: 1/5 we should explain clearly that there are are 2 usually different sets of credentials involved, those used for provisioning (can be a privileged IAM user, or even the account owner's personal access key), and "runtime" used by the Mattermost instance to invoke Apps.

The ^^ is provisioning

Author: I also agree with this suggestion. I reordered the AWS Setup instructions.  I think it helps to move the `create s3 bucket` step first.  This is a bit of a time-consuming step and doesn't require any of the credentials the user will need.

step 2 (creating an IAM user) requires some work in AWS.

Now, steps 3-5 are all very simple steps that only set variables and run the init command. 

@DHaussermann, would you review this also? I think this makes the instructions flow much better.

**From** 
AWS setup
1. Create an IAM user and access key and secret
2. Create AWS S3 bucket
3. Set AWS environment variables

**To**
AWS setup
1. Create AWS S3 bucket
2. Create an IAM user access key and secret
3. Set AWS Provision environment variables
4. Initialize the AWS resources
5. Set AWS Invoke environment variables

[`78beeb6` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/78beeb6c99739cbe855636b7f59b01e0627d90db)

You will need to create IAM user and an access key and secret so that `appsctl` can provision the app. Please follow the instructions [provided by AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/create-access-key/) to complete these steps and save the `Access key ID` and `Secret access key`.

##### 2. Create AWS S3 bucket

> You will need to create an S3 bucket within AWS.

Reviewer 3: Or use an existing bucket

Author: good suggestion.  Done. [`6881078` (#826)](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/826/commits/68810780429a8a9f6f44756093a448702f51ecd8)
